Automated Concern Exploration in Pandemic

Situations - COVID-19 as a Use Case

No Author Given

No Institute Given

Abstract. The recent outbreak of the coronavirus disease (Covid-19)
rapidly spreads across most of the countries, which has signiﬁcantly im-
pacted the people’s life in almost every aspect and challenged an economy
strain around the world. To alleviate the panics and prevent any poten-
tial social crisis, it is essential to eﬀectively detect the public concerns
through the social media. Twitter, a popular online social network, al-
lows people to share their thoughts, views and opinions towards the
latest events or news. In this study, we proposed a deep learning-based
framework to explore public concerns for Covid-19 automatically, where
Twitter has been utilised as the key source of information. We extracted
and analysed public opinions towards the pandemic. Furthermore, as
part of the proposed framework, a knowledge graph of public concern
has been constructed to investigate the interconnections.
Keywords: Covid-19 · Concern exploration · Twitter · Opinion mining
· Knowledge graph

1

Introduction

The outbreak of Covid-19 has been recognised as a severe global threat by the
World Health Organisation (WHO), and it has been impacting the world in var-
ious aspects [21]. People in some infected countries have been advised to stay
at home, avoiding public and crowded places; large convocations have been can-
celled; cities have been placed under lock-down and schools have been shut down
[7]. A striking particularity of this pandemic is the spread of both physical disease
and mental panic, i.e., not only did the coronavirus itself spread very rapidly but
so did the related information about the outbreak [5, 11]. People tend to express
their opinions and concerns about this crisis through one of the most prevalent
communicational channels, i.e., online social networks [19, 12]. Such information
provides strong evidence on what public concerns to be addressed urgently. This
also explicitly reveals where to intervene with key communication campaigns,
what guidelines for protection to be provided and how to determine the measure
for alleviating public fear [17, 9, 4]. Therefore, it is essential to automatically
capture and detect the public concerns in this pandemic situation.

Concern reveals negative beliefs about worry. Thus, it is essential to extract
people’s opinions, sentiments, emotions from their generated texts for concern
detection. Opinion mining, a sub-ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP),

2

No Author Given

has been recognised as an important role in making sense of the textual data, e.g.,
Tweets from Twitter 1 [22]. In particular, sentiment analysis and opinion mining
has been widely adopted in marketing, assisting customers in making purchasing
decisions and aiding the business owners to understand the customers’ feedback
[22, 20]. Likewise, in the context of Covid-19, it turns out to be an essential
technique to analyse the public opinions and detect corresponding concerns.
On the other side, the interconnected concerns exploration is also useful. By
considering the causality, formation of a concern potentially results in other
concerns. Because a group of people’s concern may lead a chain of actions, that
damage the interests of another group people. For example, the poor concern
about the living expenses, while the rich get worried about being robbed by the
poor. In this sense, mitigating one concern can potentially address the related
ones. Knowledge Graph (KG) has been recognised as a suitable technique to
collate all the facts and create interconnected results. Therefore, KG has been
employed in our approach as an essential components unravel the associations
among public concerns.

In this paper, we formally deﬁned public concern and proposed an automated

approach to detect concerns by facilitating deep-learning models.

2 Related Works

Due to the severity and rapidly-evolving nature of the Covid-19, the response
from both computer science and data science community has been ongoing. A
number of researchers collected and published Covid-19 datasets, which greatly
contributes to the studies of online conversation dynamics in the context the epi-
demic outbreak [1, 3, 15, 16, 24]. Based on these open datasets, further research
works around content analysis have been conducted. Boberg et al. analyse the
factual basis of public fears based on the alternative news media’s output on
Facebook 2 during the early Corona crisis [2]. Jahanbin et al. analyse corpus
of Covid-19 tweets and identify common responses to the pandemic over time
[13]. Li et al. attempt identify situational information of Covid-19 and explore
it is being disseminated on social media [18]. Most of researchers conduct stati-
cal analysis in regards to the keywords and trending topics. However, very few
research works have been dedicated to mining the ﬁne-grained opinions for ex-
ploring and monitoring the social concerns. Diﬀerent from the existing studies,
we develop a novel model, which is capable of analysing the aspect-based opin-
ions and detecting the public concerns through social media.

Deep learning has demonstrated great success on solving complex learning
problems. Nowadays, it has been widely applied to NLP and social media data
ﬁltering, which yields remarkable performance [14]. Jelodar et al. utilise NLP and
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) for Covid-19 related discussion extraction and
topic modelling from social media, where a supervised method is developed to

1 https://twitter.com/
2 https://www.facebook.com/

Automated Concern Exploration in COVID-19 Pandemic

3

analyse people opinion of Covid-19-related comments from reddit forums 3 [14].
Fan et al. propose a hybrid machine-learning pipeline for automated mapping
of events and locations from social media posts during disasters, where a ﬁne-
tuned Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) has
been adopted to classify the posts [8]. However, very few researchers develop
deep learning models for social concern detection in the context of Covid-19.
Moreover, the connections of public concerns are also missing from the existing
studies.

Knowledge Graph (KG) has been acknowledged as a signiﬁcant technique to
collate all the facts and present interconnected results. It has been adopted in
many AI and NLP tasks, e.g., Q/A, machine translation, topic extraction, etc.
Gottschalk et at. studied a multilingual event-centric temporal KG, i.e., Even-
tKG, aiming at addressing insuﬃcient coverage and completeness with respect to
events and temporal relations of popular knowledge base database including DB-
pedia, Yago and Wikidata [10]. Whereas, the latest news and events cannot be
covered since the proposed approach relies on the existing static knowledge base,
thus may not cope with a dynamic information source. Yoo et al. develop a novel
method, i.e., PolarisX, to automatically expand a KG by utilising a ﬁne-tuned
pre-trained multilingual BERT model, where the data are constantly collected
from news sites and social media platforms in real-time [23]. Based on these
studies, we employ KG as an essential components to explore the associations
among public concerns in real-time.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst research study, applying NLP
and deep learning algorithms to explore public concerns and deeply investigate
the corresponding relations using online social media data in the context of
Covid-19.

3 Preliminaries

In this section, we formally deﬁne public concerns revealed from online social
network, i.e., Twitter, as well as the concern detection problem.

3.1 Formal Deﬁnition

Deﬁnition 1: Entity generally describes an object which can be referred to as
a product, medical service, drug, disease, person, event or organisation. In the
current setting, an entity represents a word object which is associated with the
public concern. Speciﬁcally, any tweet twi, twi ∈ T W posted by user consists
of a word sequence twi = {w1, w2, ..., wn}, where T W denotes the collected
tweet data. An entity ei ∈ E appears to be an element from the word sequence,
semantically relating to the public concerns, where E = {e1, e2, ..., en}, n ∈ N
denotes the entity set of the corpus.

Entity and tweet represent a many-to-many relationship, i.e., an entity may

exist in many tweets, and a tweet may include more than one entities.

3 https://www.reddit.com/

4

No Author Given

Deﬁnition 2: Concern in general refers to negative beliefs about worry. In this
study, concern is deﬁned as most people’s negative opinions towards a particular
aspect of a crisis. Mathematically, a concern ci identiﬁed from twi is denoted by
a quadruple ci = (ej, rj, pj, tj), ci ∈ C, where ej represents the entity extracted
from tweet twi, rj means the re-tweet number, pj ∈ {P ositive, N egative, N eutral}
is the sentiment polarity towards twi, and tj shows the posting date and time
of the tweet.

Deﬁnition 3: Concern Triple is recognised as the fundamental element, con-
tributing to the formation of a public concern knowledge graph. A single word or
phrase turns out to be very limited to present the true meaning of a concern. By
contrast, the triple structure is capable of semantically revealing what a concern
is about. A public concern cti = (si, ri, oi) comes with three components si, ri
and oi, referring to as subject, relationship and object, respectively.

For example, “The Corona Virus is like an intelligence test for humanity”
is a tweet posted by one user at 21:59:30 19th March 2020 and the re-tweet
number is 385. Based on these facts, the identiﬁed entities e1=corona virus, e2=
intelligence test, r1=r2=385, p1=p2=0.01, t1=t2=21:59:30 19th March 2020, and
identiﬁed concerns c1 = (e1, r1, p1, t1) and c2 = (e2, r2, p2, t2). The corresponding
concern triple is:

ct1 = (corona virus, is like, intelligence test)

3.2 Problem Formulation

Based on the deﬁnitions given in the previous section, we formally deﬁne the pub-
lic concern detection. It aims identify a set of typical concerns {cm|cm ∈ C∧pm =
N egative} that attract most people’s attention from a large amount of social me-
dia data T W , explain the meanings by extracting semantic concern triples and
exploring the interconnections among detected concerns {(sm, rm, om)|sm, om ∈
C ∧ ∃rm}.

4 Automated Public Concern Detection

In this section, we systematically elaborate our proposed automated concern
detection framework. The explanations are developed mainly based on the social
media data ﬂow.

Figure 1 demonstrates the proposed automated concern detection framework,
which turns out to be a hierarchical multi-stage processes with four main com-
ponents, including data pre-processing, deep learning models, typical concern
extraction and clustering, and concern knowledge graph construction.

Automated Concern Exploration in COVID-19 Pandemic

5

4.1 Data Pre-processing and Information Extraction

Twitter has been reconsigned a popular public online social platform for people
to communicate and share opinions with each other. However, due to informal
and abbreviated words, as well as improper sentences with grammatical errors, it
is almost impossible to analyse tweets or extract meaningful information without
adequate data pre-processing.

The initial module of the framework tends to improve the quality the social
media data through pre-processing. The typical actions incorporate removing
meaningless data fractions, such as URL, hash-tag, punctuation, non-English
contents, symbols, stop words and emoji.

As for the information extraction, three elements, i.e., concern entities, sen-
timent score and re-tweet number, are supposed to be captured. The framework
detect concern entities through deep learning models. Sentiment score also plays
an important role in determining whether the a twitter statement is concerned.
The concern sentiment score in the current context can be obtained by combining
text sentiment score with the emoji sentiment score based on Emoji Sentiment
Ranking 4. Re-tweet count appears a signiﬁcant indicator, showing the popular-
ity of a tweet and reﬂecting the degree of public attention.

Fig. 1. Automated Concern Detection Framework

4 Emoji Sentiment Ranking http://kt.ijs.si/data/Emoji_sentiment_ranking/

6

No Author Given

4.2 Deep Learning Models

Deep learning models have been utilised as a semantic analyser in the automated
concern detection framework. BERT appears to be a pre-trained language model
released by Google, which is capable of taking up a number of classic NLP tasks
[6, 23]. In the current setting, we ﬁne-tune the pre-trained BERT model for two
purposes, i.e., extracting potential public concern entities and create embeddings
for the detected concerns.

In the former, to train a concern entities extraction model, it is required to
ﬁgure out the potential concerns in a tweet. Thus, the annotated concern entities
and tweets are used to train the model.

The input representation of BERT for each token is summation of the token,
segment and position embeddings. [CLS] is appended to the beginning of each
sentence and [SEP ] is inserted in the sentence end to separate two sentences.

For a tweet tw with entity e, we add [CLS] and [SEP ] to the beginning
and ending of tw, and a special token ’$’ before and after entity to make BERT
module capture the location information.

For example, the original tweet is ”The Corona Virus is like an intelligence
test for humanity”, after inserting special separate tokens, it will become ”[CLS]
The $ Corona Virus $ is like an $ intelligence test $ for humanity [SEP]”.

There are total 12 encoder layers for BERT module and we use summation of
last 4 layer output as entity embedding as equation (2). So the ﬁnal embedding
for each entity is as below.

Hi =

1

(m − n + 1) ∗ 4

h(l)
k

(1)

m(cid:88)

L11(cid:88)

k=n

l=L8

where Hi is the embedding of ith entity, and h(l)
token at layer k.

k refers to the embedding of k(th)

4.3 Concern Extraction and Clustering

K-means clustering is an unsupervised learning algorithm which is to ﬁnd groups
in the data with given cluster number K.

argmin

ok∈O

dist(ok, H (i))2,

(2)

where ok is the kth cluster centroids in set O with k ∈ K. dist(.) is the standard(L2)
Euclidean distance. H (i) is the sum of last 4 layer output of BERT for ith concern
entity.

(cid:88)

i

H (i) =

1
4

h(i)

(3)

Where h(i) is the BERT ith layer output and i = {8, 9, 10, 11}.

Automated Concern Exploration in COVID-19 Pandemic

7

For all extracted concerns in previous step, the entity embeddings are as input
of K means clustering algorithm. In order to determine the optimal value of k,
Silhousette analysis is used to study the separation distance between resulting
concern clusters.

SilhouetteCoef f icient =

(bi − ai)
max(bi, ai)

(4)

where bi is the mean intra cluster distance to other points in the same cluster
and ai depicts mean distance to other points to its closest neighbouring cluster.
The Silhousette score displays a measure of how close each point in one cluster
is to points in the neighbouring clusters, and its value range is [-1, 1] in which
+1 means points in one cluster are far away from the neighbouring clusters.

4.4 Concern Knowledge Graph

After concern clustering, public representative concerns are selected as candi-
date concerns for concern triple extraction using syntactic dependency parser of
Spacy. The concern triplet subject-predicate-object is denoted as (head, relationship, tail).
We will detect relationship, head or tail based on extracted concern, which means
if concern is subject in tweet, the task is to determine object and relation in same
tweet.

For example, in tweet ”P rinceCharleshastestedpositivef orCorona.” the ex-
tracted concern is ”P rinceCharles” as head of triple, then determine predicate
”tested” as relationship and object ”positiveCorona” as tail.

In order to easily understand the meaning about extracted concerns, concern

knowledge graph is constructed using concern triples.

4.5 NLP - Deep Learning Module

@Jingli, needs the explanations with formulas

4.6 KG - Construction Module

5 Experiments

@Jingli, IN THIS SECTION, PLEASE EVALUATE THE MODEL, THE PER-
FORMANCE OF ASPECT EXTRACTION AND OPINION MINING. IT WOULD
BETTER IF SIMPLE COMPARISON AGAINST THE OTHER CLASSIC AL-
GORITHMS COULD BE GIVEN.

5.1 Dataset

Dataset 5 [16]

5 https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/corona-virus-covid-19-tweets-dataset

8

No Author Given

Rabinadra collect COVID-19 related English tweets from Twitter by using
keyword ﬁlter, like ”corona”, ”coronavirus”, ”covid”, ”covid19” and variants of
”sarscov2”. We use software Hydrator to download full tweet information in-
cluding columns ”created at”, ”retweet count”,”text”,”user location” according
to provided Tweet IDs.

5.2 Evaluation

5.3 Covid-19 Analysis

6 Conclusion and Future Work

combination of NLP and KG Future work can be: disaster relief, fake news
detection, disaster management and mitigation

References

1. Covid-19 open research dataset (cord-19). https://pages.semanticscholar.org/

coronavirus-research (2020, March 20), [Online; accessed 11-April-2020]

2. Boberg, S., Quandt, T., Schatto-Eckrodt, T., Frischlich, L.: Pandemic populism:
Facebook pages of alternative news media and the corona crisis–a computational
content analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02566 (2020)

3. Chen, E., Lerman, K., Ferrara, E.: Covid-19: The ﬁrst public coronavirus twitter

dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07372 (2020)

4. Cinelli, M., Quattrociocchi, W., Galeazzi, A., Valensise, C.M., Brugnoli, E.,
Schmidt, A.L., Zola, P., Zollo, F., Scala, A.: The covid-19 social media infodemic.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004 (2020)

5. Depoux, A., Martin, S., Karaﬁllakis, E., Preet, R., Wilder-Smith, A., Larson, H.:
The pandemic of social media panic travels faster than the covid-19 outbreak.
Journal of Travel Medicine (2020)

6. Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
(2018)

J.:

Covid-19

con-
7. Enberg,
sumers
https://www.emarketer.com/content/
coronavirus-covid19-boost-ecommerce-stores-amazon-retail (2020, March
10), [Online; accessed 11-April-2020]

concerns may

ecommerce

stores.

boost

avoid

as

8. Fan, C., Wu, F., Mostafavi, A.: A hybrid machine learning pipeline for automated
mapping of events and locations from social media in disasters. IEEE Access (2020)
9. Garrett, L.: Covid-19: the medium is the message. The Lancet 395(10228), 942–943

(2020)

10. Gottschalk, S., Demidova, E.: Eventkg: A multilingual event-centric temporal
knowledge graph. In: European Semantic Web Conference. pp. 272–287. Springer
(2018)

11. Hou, Z., Du, F., Jiang, H., Zhou, X., Lin, L.: Assessment of public attention,
risk perception, emotional and behavioural responses to the covid-19 outbreak: so-
cial media surveillance in china. Risk Perception, Emotional and Behavioural Re-
sponses to the COVID-19 Outbreak: Social Media Surveillance in China (3/6/2020)
(2020)

Automated Concern Exploration in COVID-19 Pandemic

9

12. Hu, Y., Bai, Q., Li, W.: Context-aware inﬂuence diﬀusion in online social networks.

In: Paciﬁc Rim Knowledge Acquisition Workshop. pp. 153–162. Springer (2019)

13. Jahanbin, K., Rahmanian, V.: Using twitter and web news mining to predict covid-

19 outbreak (2020)

14. Jelodar, H., Wang, Y., Orji, R., Huang, H.: Deep sentiment classiﬁcation and topic
discovery on novel coronavirus or covid-19 online discussions: Nlp using lstm re-
current neural network approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11695 (2020)

15. Killeen, B.D., Wu, J.Y., Shah, K., Zapaishchykova, A., Nikutta, P., Tamhane, A.,
Chakraborty, S., Wei, J., Gao, T., Thies, M., et al.: A county-level dataset for
informing the united states’ response to covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00756
(2020)

16. Lamsal,

R.:

Corona

virus

(covid-19)

tweets

dataset

(2020).

https://doi.org/10.21227/781w-ef42, http://dx.doi.org/10.21227/781w-ef42

17. Lazard, A.J., Scheinfeld, E., Bernhardt, J.M., Wilcox, G.B., Suran, M.: Detecting
themes of public concern: a text mining analysis of the centers for disease con-
trol and prevention’s ebola live twitter chat. American journal of infection control
43(10), 1109–1111 (2015)

18. Li, L., Zhang, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, J., Wang, T., Gao, T.L., Duan, W., Tsoi,
K.K.f., Wang, F.Y.: Characterizing the propagation of situational information in
social media during covid-19 epidemic: A case study on weibo. IEEE Transactions
on Computational Social Systems (2020)

19. Li, W., Bai, Q., Zhang, M., Nguyen, T.D.: Automated inﬂuence maintenance in
social networks: an agent-based approach. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering 31(10), 1884–1897 (2018)

20. Rathan, M., Hulipalled, V.R., Venugopal, K., Patnaik, L.: Consumer insight min-
ing: aspect based twitter opinion mining of mobile phone reviews. Applied Soft
Computing 68, 765–773 (2018)

21. Sohrabi, C., Alsaﬁ, Z., ONeill, N., Khan, M., Kerwan, A., Al-Jabir, A., Iosiﬁdis,
C., Agha, R.: World health organization declares global emergency: A review of
the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19). International Journal of Surgery (2020)

22. Wang, R., Zhou, D., Jiang, M., Si, J., Yang, Y.: A survey on opinion mining: from

stance to product aspect. IEEE Access 7, 41101–41124 (2019)

23. Yoo, S., Jeong, O.: Automating the expansion of a knowledge graph. Expert Sys-

tems with Applications 141, 112965 (2020)

24. Yu, J.: Open access institutional and news media tweet dataset for covid-19 social

science research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01791 (2020)

